.TH XTGEOIP 1 "" "xtgeoip 0.1.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
xtgeoip \- Build and manage xt_geoip data from MaxMind GeoLite2 CSVs.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xtgeoip
[\fB\-b\fR] [\fB\-c\fR] [\fB\-p\fR] [\fB\-f\fR]
.br
.B xtgeoip
\fIcommand\fR [\fIoptions\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBxtgeoip\fR is a Rust reimplementation of \fIxt_geoip_build_maxmind\fR
(originally by Jan Engelhardt and Philip Prindeville),
with additional features, correctness improvements, and legacy compatibility mode.
.PP
Public-facing servers are exposed to a constant and large volume of automated
scanning and attack traffic.
Analysis typically shows that a disproportionate share of this traffic
originates from a small number of countries.
GeoIP filtering \(em blocking or logging traffic by country of origin at the
firewall \(em reduces this problem to manageable levels without requiring
ongoing per-address intervention.
.PP
On Linux, GeoIP filtering is provided by the
.B xt_geoip
netfilter kernel module (part of \fIxtables-addons\fR).
Once the binary IP range files are installed and the module is loaded,
a firewall rule can target
.BI "\-\-src\-cc " XX
where
.I XX
is an ISO\ 3166-1 alpha-2 country code or a comma-separated list of them
(e.g.\&
.BR "CN,RU" ).
.PP
\fBxtgeoip\fR handles the full pipeline: downloading the latest GeoLite2 CSV
databases from MaxMind, verifying their integrity, converting them into the
binary format required by
.BR xt_geoip ,
and managing backups, archives, and housekeeping.
Each country produces two output files \(em one for IPv4
.RI ( .iv4 )
and one for IPv6
.RI ( .iv6 )
\(em named by ISO country code (e.g.\&
.IR US.iv4 ,
.IR US.iv6 ,
.IR CN.iv4 ).
.PP
\fBxtgeoip\fR must be run as root to write to the output directory.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.BI "build " "[\fB\-b\fR] [\fB\-c\fR] [\fB\-p\fR] [\fB\-f\fR] [\fB\-l\fR]"
Build binary xt_geoip database files from a locally stored GeoLite2 CSV archive.
Optionally back up the current database beforehand
.RB ( \-b ),
clean the output directory first
.RB ( \-c ),
prune old binary tarballs after backup
.RB ( "\-b \-p" ),
or enable legacy output mode
.RB ( \-l ).
.TP
.BI "fetch " "[\fB\-p\fR]"
Download the latest GeoLite2 Country CSV archive from MaxMind,
verify it against the MaxMind-provided SHA-256 checksum,
and store it in the archive directory.
The download is skipped if the current version is already present and verified.
Optionally prune older CSV archives after fetching
.RB ( \-p ).
.TP
.BI "run " "[\fB\-b\fR] [\fB\-c\fR] [\fB\-p\fR] [\fB\-f\fR] [\fB\-l\fR]"
Run the full pipeline: fetch, then build.
Accepts the same flags as
.B fetch
and
.B build
combined.
When
.B \-p
is used with
.BR run ,
CSV archives (not binary tarballs) are pruned, after the fetch step.
.TP
.BI "conf " "\fB\-d\fR|\fB\-e\fR|\fB\-s\fR"
Manage system configuration.
Exactly one of
.BR \-d ,
.BR \-e ,
or
.B \-s
must be given.
.RS
.TP
.B \-d
Show the default (example) configuration with all options documented.
.TP
.B \-e
Open the system configuration file in
.BR $EDITOR .
.TP
.B \-s
Show the current system configuration.
.RE
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-backup
Back up the current binary database to a compressed tarball in the archive
directory before replacing it.
In verified mode (default), all files named in the BLAKE3 manifest must exist
and pass checksum verification before the backup proceeds.
Use
.B \-f
to override verification and force the backup regardless (useful when the
output directory is in a partially broken state).
Valid with:
.BR build ,
.BR run ,
and top-level invocation.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-clean
Delete the current binary database files from the output directory.
In verified mode (without
.BR \-f ),
only files named in the BLAKE3 manifest are deleted, along with xtgeoip
metadata files (version file, manifest).
With
.BR \-f ,
all
.IR *.iv4
and
.IR *.iv6
files plus xtgeoip metadata are deleted, regardless of the manifest.
When used with
.BR \-b ,
backup always executes before clean.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force
Override safety checks for
.B \-b
or
.BR \-c .
For backup: proceeds even if the version file, manifest, or some binary files
are missing or fail verification.
For clean: deletes all
.IR *.iv4
and
.IR *.iv6
files regardless of the manifest.
.B \-f
requires exactly one of
.B \-b
or
.B \-c
\(em using
.B \-f
with both in the same invocation is an error (ambiguous intent).
Not valid with
.B fetch
or
.BR conf .
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-legacy
Enable legacy output mode.
Reproduces the output of the original Perl implementation, including known
data errors, for compatibility with historically generated files and checksum
matching.
Should not be used for new deployments.
See
.B LEGACY MODE
below.
Valid with:
.B build
and
.B run
only.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-prune
Prune older archived versions after the current operation,
retaining the most recent
.I n
versions (configurable; default: 3).
The prune target is determined by context:
.RS
.TP
With
.B fetch
or
.BR run :
prune older GeoLite2 CSV archives from the archive directory.
.TP
With
.B "build \-b"
or top-level
.BR \-b :
prune older binary tarballs from the archive directory.
.PP
Using
.B \-p
without a fetch or backup context
(e.g.\&
.B "build \-p"
without
.BR \-b )
is an error.
Using
.B \-p
in a context where both fetch and backup are active
(e.g.\&
.BR "run \-b \-p" )
is an error: the prune target is ambiguous.
To prune both, run the program twice.
.RE
.SH EXECUTION ORDER
The order in which flags are given on the command line is always ignored.
The execution order is fixed and determined by the most logical sequence for
the operations requested.
The invariant is: \fIback up before modifying; clean before building\fR.
.PP
Representative fixed orderings:
.RS
.TP
.B "xtgeoip \-b \-c"
backup \(-> clean
.TP
.B "xtgeoip \-b \-p"
backup \(-> prune binary archives
.TP
.B "xtgeoip build \-b \-c \-p"
backup \(-> prune binary archives \(-> clean \(-> build
.TP
.B "xtgeoip run \-c \-p"
clean \(-> fetch \(-> prune CSV archives \(-> build
.RE
.PP
This means
.B "xtgeoip \-b \-c"
and
.B "xtgeoip \-c \-b"
are identical; the declared order of flags has no effect on the order of
execution.
.SH LEGACY MODE
The original Perl implementation contains a known data error: it maps some
MaxMind continent-code rows to country codes, producing semantically incorrect
output.
.PP
.TP
Continent
.I Asia
(MaxMind geoname_id 6255147) is mapped to country code
.BR AS ,
which is the ISO\ 3166-1 code for American Samoa.
A large number of Asia continent-level IP ranges are therefore incorrectly
merged into the American Samoa country bucket.
.TP
Continent
.I Europe
(MaxMind geoname_id 6255148) is mapped to
.BR EU ,
which is not a valid ISO\ 3166-1 country code.
.PP
Default mode assigns all continent-only and undefined rows to
.B O1
(the IANA-reserved code for unassigned/other), which is semantically correct
and avoids the collision problems above.
.PP
Legacy mode
.RB ( \-l ", " \-\-legacy )
reproduces the original behaviour exactly, including these errors,
for compatibility with historically generated output and for producing
identical checksums to older tooling.
It should not be used for new deployments.
.PP
If you previously ran \fBxtgeoip\fR with \fB\-\-legacy\fR and later switch to
default mode, two orphaned files will remain in the output directory:
.IR EU.iv4
and
.IR EU.iv6 .
These are listed in the
.I orphaned
file in the output directory and are safe to remove.
To clean them up, run:
.PP
.RS
.B xtgeoip build \-c \-f
.RE
.SH CONFIGURATION
The system configuration file is
.B /etc/xtgeoip.conf
(TOML format).
An example configuration with all options documented is provided at
.BR /usr/share/xt_geoip/xtgeoip.conf.example ;
copy it to
.B /etc/xtgeoip.conf
and edit as required.
.PP
To download GeoLite2 databases, a free MaxMind account is required.
The following two parameters must be configured:
.TP
.B account_id
Your MaxMind account ID.
Obtain one at
.IR https://www.maxmind.com/en/geolite2/signup .
.TP
.B license_key
A license key created from your MaxMind account dashboard.
.PP
Additional configuration sections:
.RS
.TP
.B [paths]
.I archive_dir
(default:
.IR /var/lib/xt_geoip )
and
.I output_dir
(default:
.IR /usr/share/xt_geoip ).
.TP
.B [maxmind]
Download URL and (optionally) request timeout.
.TP
.B [logging]
Log file path.
.RE
.PP
Use
.B "xtgeoip conf \-s"
to display the active configuration, or
.B "xtgeoip conf \-d"
to display the full default configuration with comments.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B xtgeoip -h
display usage
.TP
.B xtgeoip -b
backup database
.TP
.B xtgeoip -c
clean database
.TP
.B xtgeoip -b -c
backup then clean
.TP
.B xtgeoip -b -p
backup then prune
.TP
.B xtgeoip build
build database
.TP
.B xtgeoip build -l
build (legacy mode)
.TP
.B xtgeoip build -b -p
backup then prune then build
.TP
.B xtgeoip build -c -f
clean then build
.TP
.B xtgeoip build -b -c -p
backup, prune, clean, build
.TP
.B xtgeoip conf -s
show configuration
.TP
.B xtgeoip conf -d
show default configuration
.TP
.B xtgeoip conf -e
edit configuration
.TP
.B xtgeoip fetch
fetch CSVs
.TP
.B xtgeoip fetch -p
fetch then prune archives
.TP
.B xtgeoip run
fetch then build
.TP
.B xtgeoip run -l
fetch then build (legacy)
.TP
.B xtgeoip run -p
fetch then prune then build
.TP
.B xtgeoip run -c -p
clean then fetch then prune then build
.TP
.B xtgeoip run -c -f
force clean then fetch then build
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/xtgeoip.conf
System configuration file.
.TP
.I /usr/share/xt_geoip/xtgeoip.conf.example
Example configuration with all options documented.
.TP
.I /var/lib/xt_geoip/
Archive directory.
Stores downloaded GeoLite2 CSV archives and binary database tarballs (backups).
.TP
.I /usr/share/xt_geoip/
Output directory.
Stores binary IP range files
.RI ( *.iv4 ,
.IR *.iv6 ),
the version file, the BLAKE3 manifest, and (when present) the orphaned file
list.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR xt_geoip (8),
.BR iptables (8),
.BR nftables (8),
.BR xtables-addons (7)
.SH AUTHORS
Original Perl implementation by Jan Engelhardt and Philip Prindeville.
.br
Rust reimplementation by Haze N Sparkle.
